what an inconvenient truth did for
global warming dirt the movie may do for
our soil turns out we're running out of
it it may seem as if dirt is everywhere
with plenty to go around forever but
it's actually disappearing fast if we
don't take care of the soil which is
just the first five centimetres layer of
life that is on the earth our future is
thought that it can then that UC
Berkeley professor is part of a
documentary trying to warn people dirt
is under attack third of our topsoil
we've lost in the last 100 years the
documentary highlights threats to
farmland all over the world but there's
a lot to be concerned about right here
at home the dirt we need to grow food is
being mistreated and getting used up we
talked to documentary producer and
environmentalist Jean Rosso by satellite
from Los Angeles Jean how big a problem
is this really agriculture systems will
collapse and we will not have the
defense's we need to deal with the
consequences of climate change unless we
take care of dirt so it's a huge huge
problem that may sound alarmist but Ron
Amundson you see professor of soil
sciences agrees the way we treat dirt is
affecting global warming Cal has been
ground zero in soil research since the
late 1800s about twenty percent of all
this carbon dioxide that's getting into
the atmosphere is actually do directly
or indirectly to agriculture Amundson
says plowing fields stirs up
microorganisms in the soil that puts
carbon dioxide into the air and adds to
global warming another major issue is
erosion when dirt is left bare during
farming over time the soil is blown away
by wind and washed away by water and
with it go critical nutrients this is an
emergency because we only have a small
amount of land to raise food crops on
and if it's eroding and losing its
carbon what are we going to do for food
soil specialist Bob Shafer is working on
these problems at farms in Napa and
Sonoma he says we need to completely
rethink the way we grow things instead
of plowing Schafer uses other methods to
prepare the soil
he uses compost made from food scraps
that adds nutrition to the soil and
keeps it soft for planting right out
here where we put a lot of compost you
see the earthworms this is a very
positive sign of soil health Shafer also
uses cover crops extra plants mixed in
with the main crop they prevent erosion
and the diversity of vegetation adds
even more nutrients there's no reason
for this be considered a weed because
it's actually benefiting both the soil
below ground and the soil above ground
in addition to keeping soil healthy
another issue is keeping it from getting
paved over at UC Berkeley for example
there used to be lots of dirt but not
anymore I've walked across the entire
campus I think this is about the most
pristine spot in the Berkeley campus
professor Robinson is talking about the
little ring of dirt around this oak tree
if we look at the soil that lies
underneath the leaf material we can see
this really nice dark organic matter
rich surface layer this kind of virgin
dirt is critical to keep the planet
healthy but an environmental group
called the open space Institute says the
United States is losing more than a
million acres of both farms and open
space every year most of the land is
cleared to make way for development
parking lots shopping centers and new
houses that's two acres of land
disappearing every minute every day
scientists have been trying to focus
public attention on dirt for some time
but soil just isn't that sexy so now
they're hoping the new documentary will
grab the spotlight do you think with
dirt the movie you can hit pay dirt pay
dirt for us would be showing it at
Congress at the White House and in local
communities to get people to understand
dirt is critical to our very survival
God made dirt don't hurt amazing issue
isn't a dirt the movie will not be in
theaters until next fall but there is a
preview showing in Berkeley next week
with abc7 news calm and look under see
it on TV for details it's an issue we're
going to be hearing increasingly more
about it